=== PRONUNCIATION GUIDE ===
Pronunciation guide for Sanskrit terms in this text:
  Arthaśāstra → /ɐrt̪ʰɐʃaːst̪rɐ/
  Atharvaveda → /ɐt̪ʰɐrvɐveːd̪ɐ/
  Bṛhat → /brɪɦɐt̪/
  Dharmaśāstra → /d̪ʱɐrmɐʃaːst̪rɐ/
  Gautama → /gɐʊt̪ɐmɐ/
  Kauṭilya → /kɐʊʈɪljɐ/
  Kāmasūtra → /kaːmɐsuːt̪rɐ/
  Mahābhārata → /mɐɦaːbʰaːrɐt̪ɐ/
  Manusmṛti → /mɐnʊsmrɪt̪ɪ/
  Mādhava → /maːd̪ʱɐvɐ/
  Mānavas → /maːnɐvɐs/
  Pāṇini → /paːɳɪnɪ/
  Vasiṣṭha → /vɐsɪʂʈʰɐ/
  Yājñavalkya → /jaːgɲɐvɐlkjɐ/
  candrikā → /tʃɐnd̪rɪkaː/
  dharma → /d̪ʱɐrmɐ/
  dharmasūtra → /d̪ʱɐrmɐsuːt̪rɐ/
  dharmasūtras → /d̪ʱɐrmɐsuːt̪rɐz/
  dharmaśāstra → /d̪ʱɐrmɐʃaːst̪rɐ/
  mantra → /mɐnt̪rɐ/
  niyoga → /nɪjoːgɐ/
  smṛti → /smrɪt̪ɪ/
  sūtra → /suːt̪rɐ/
  sūtras → /suːt̪rɐz/
  vyavahāra → /vjɐvɐɦaːrɐ/
  Āpastamba → /aːpɐst̪ɐmbɐ/
  śāstra → /ʃaːst̪rɐ/

=== CHAPTER ===
14. Arthashastra of Kautilya

=== KANE'S SYNOPSIS ===
The three words used in the same sense viz. Arthaśāstra, Dandanīti and Rājaśāstra or Rājanīti or Rājanītiśāstra or Nītiśāstra - meaning and scope of arthaśāstra and relation to dharmaśāstra - arthaśāstra, an upaveda of Atharvaveda - Mr. Kavi wrongly holds that Kautilya borrows from the Cākṣuṣīya Arthaśāstra - the Artha- śāstra of Kautilya, first translated by Dr. Śāma Śāstrī and text published in 1909 - other editions - numerous works and articles inspired by the publication of Kautilya Arthaśāstra - Kautilya is the oldest extant work on Arthaśāstra - purpose of this śāstra - rule in case of conflict between Dharmaśāstra and Arthaśāstra - thinking on politics, economics, law etc. prevailed in India several centuries before Christ as is clear from the Mbh., and early Dharma- sūtras of Gautama, Baudhayana and Āpastamba - Arthaśāstra of Brhaspati - principles, and phraseology of Arthaśāstra in the Mbh. and the Rāmāyaņa - Cāņakya and Vişņugupta are names of the same person - glowing tribute paid to Cāņakya or Vişņugupta by Kāmāndakīyanītisāra, Tantrākhyāyikā, Dandin - Bāņa and Pañca- tantra on Kautilya as author of Arthaśāstra - Bṛhatkathā of Guņādhya contained his story - Mudrārākṣasa connects his name with Kuţila - these works along with the Kathāsaritsāgara, Kāvyādarśa etc. naming Vişņugupta, Cāņakya and Kautilya singly or collectively, dealt with - Purāņas mentioning Cadragupta and his minister Kautilya - Candragupta and Seleucus - Bāņa refers to Kautilya's work as a cruel work and so also does the Matsya Purāņa - the extant Arthaśāstra itself claims that it is a work of Kautilya - Candragupta and the epithet Vrşala used for him - Vişņugupta, an astrologer mentioned by Varāhamihira must be entirely different from the author of the Arthaśāstra - controversy as to whether Kautilya can be the work of a busy minister of Candragupta Maurya - Jolly, Winternitz and Keith hold that extant work is not by the minister of Candragupta - Megasthenes, silence about Cāņakya explained - whether the Kautilya is the product of a school or of an individual author - Kautilya's views cited about 70 times in the work in the third person - explanation of this - Dr. Jolly wrong in his explanation of apadeśa ( in XV. 1 ) - Keith thinks that an author would not parade an uncompliment- ary epithet like Kautilya ( derived from kuţila ) - Is the name Kautilya or Kautalya - works on gotra and pravara give various
x ## 
forms such as Kauțalī, Kauțilya and Kautili - form, style and contents of the Kauțilīya - a few verses interspersed in the work, generally at the end - in all 375 verses excluding *mantras* - some verses are certainly quotations - work abounds in numerous technical and rare words - deviations from Pāṇini - summary of contents - section on judicial administration interesting - greatest correspondence between Kauțilīya and Yājñavalkya - some striking examples - it is Yājñavalkya that borrows - reasons - Yājñavalkya represents a far too advanced stage of juristic priniçiples than Kauțilya - close agreement between Manusmṛti and Kauțilya also - but they differ on *niyoga*, as to nomenclature of *vyavahārapadas*, about heirship of mother and paternal grandmother, on remarriage of widows, divorce, gambling - Kauțilīya long anterior to the extant Manusmṛti - Kauțilya's five references to Mānavas explained - references to Svāyambhuva and Prācetasa Manu contained in the Mahābhārata suggest that there were two works in verse on dharma and politics attributed to these or perhaps one work containing both, subsequently recast as the extant Manusmṛti - only two views ascribed to Mānavas in Kauțilīya not found in extant Manusmṛti - in the *dharmasthīya* section the only other authors or schools cited are Bārhaspatyas and Auśanasas - none of the dharmasūtras of Gautama and others are anywhere quoted by name - views cited on the question as to whom a child belongs (to the begetter or to him on whose wife it is begotten) can be traced to Baudhyāna, Gautama and Vasiṣṭha - views of Ācaryas cited in the Kauțilīya - Kauțilīya later than Gautama and Āpastamba but earlier than extant Manusmṛti - date of Kauțilīya - it is certainly not later than 2nd century A. D. and not earlier than 325 B. C. - schools named by Kauțilya and also individual authors - views of Ācaryas are quoted over fifty times and Kauțilya differs in each case - meaning of ‘ācaryas’ - literature known to Kauțilya - Sanskrit official language and the work mentions *guṇas* of composition - Kauțilīya agrees with Kāmasūtra in several respects - Dr. Jolly and Prof. Keith opine that both works composed about same time - points of difference between the two works - countries and peoples mentioned by Kauțilya - silks from Cīna and blankets from Nepal - home of Kauțilya, southern acc. to Dr. Jolly who concludes so, on two quite worthless grounds - Buddhist and Jain traditions associate Cāṇakya with Gāndhāra - was resident of the extreme North-west of India - three principal groups of writers on the question of the
 
age of Kauṭilya – corporations of Licchavis, Vr̥jikas and others mentioned – meaning of ‘ rājasabdopajivinah ’ (in XI. 1) - best breeds of horses - Mlecchas sold or pledged children - references to Buddhists and Ājīvakas - weights to be made from stones of Magadha and Mekala - most of the stories cited as illustrations by Kauṭilya occur in the Mahābhārata, but some divergence exists in the case of Janamejaya, Māṇḍavya - Kauṭilya's knowledge of drugs and of rasa (mercury) - references to shrines of Śiva, Skanda &c.- traditional date of 300 B. C. more likely to be correct than 3rd centnry A. D. approved by of by Dr. Jolly and Winternitz - two commentaries on Kauṭilya, Nayacandrikā of Mādhavayajvan and Pratipadapañcikā of Bhaṭṭasvāmin - sūtras attributed to Cāṇakya - several nīti collections in verse ascribed to Cāṇakya are later than Kauṭilya.

=== TEXT FOR AUDIO ===
The three words used in the same sense viz. Arthaśāstra, Dandanīti and Rājaśāstra or Rājanīti or Rājanītiśāstra or Nītiśāstra - meaning and scope of arthaśāstra and relation to dharmaśāstra - arthaśāstra, an upaveda of Atharvaveda - Mr. Kavi wrongly holds that Kautilya borrows from the Cākṣuṣīya Arthaśāstra - the Artha- śāstra of Kautilya, first translated by Dr. Śāma Śāstrī and text published in 1909 - other editions - numerous works and articles inspired by the publication of Kautilya Arthaśāstra - Kautilya is the oldest extant work on Arthaśāstra - purpose of this śāstra - rule in case of conflict between Dharmaśāstra and Arthaśāstra - thinking on politics, economics, law etc. prevailed in India several centuries before Christ as is clear from the Mbh., and early Dharma- sūtras of Gautama, Baudhayana and Āpastamba - Arthaśāstra of Brhaspati - principles, and phraseology of Arthaśāstra in the Mbh. and the Rāmāyaņa - Cāņakya and Vişņugupta are names of the same person - glowing tribute paid to Cāņakya or Vişņugupta by Kāmāndakīyanītisāra, Tantrākhyāyikā, Dandin - Bāņa and Pañca- tantra on Kautilya as author of Arthaśāstra - Bṛhatkathā of Guņādhya contained his story - Mudrārākṣasa connects his name with Kuţila - these works along with the Kathāsaritsāgara, Kāvyādarśa etc. naming Vişņugupta, Cāņakya and Kautilya singly or collectively, dealt with - Purāņas mentioning Cadragupta and his minister Kautilya - Candragupta and Seleucus - Bāņa refers to Kautilya's work as a cruel work and so also does the Matsya Purāņa - the extant Arthaśāstra itself claims that it is a work of Kautilya - Candragupta and the epithet Vrşala used for him - Vişņugupta, an astrologer mentioned by Varāhamihira must be entirely different from the author of the Arthaśāstra - controversy as to whether Kautilya can be the work of a busy minister of Candragupta Maurya - Jolly, Winternitz and Keith hold that extant work is not by the minister of Candragupta - Megasthenes, silence about Cāņakya explained - whether the Kautilya is the product of a school or of an individual author - Kautilya's views cited about 70 times in the work in the third person - explanation of this - Dr. Jolly wrong in his explanation of apadeśa ( in XV. 1 ) - Keith thinks that an author would not parade an uncompliment- ary epithet like Kautilya ( derived from kuţila ) - Is the name Kautilya or Kautalya - works on gotra and pravara give various
x ## 
forms such as Kauțalī, Kauțilya and Kautili - form, style and contents of the Kauțilīya - a few verses interspersed in the work, generally at the end - in all 375 verses excluding *mantras* - some verses are certainly quotations - work abounds in numerous technical and rare words - deviations from Pāṇini - summary of contents - section on judicial administration interesting - greatest correspondence between Kauțilīya and Yājñavalkya - some striking examples - it is Yājñavalkya that borrows - reasons - Yājñavalkya represents a far too advanced stage of juristic priniçiples than Kauțilya - close agreement between Manusmṛti and Kauțilya also - but they differ on *niyoga*, as to nomenclature of *vyavahārapadas*, about heirship of mother and paternal grandmother, on remarriage of widows, divorce, gambling - Kauțilīya long anterior to the extant Manusmṛti - Kauțilya's five references to Mānavas explained - references to Svāyambhuva and Prācetasa Manu contained in the Mahābhārata suggest that there were two works in verse on dharma and politics attributed to these or perhaps one work containing both, subsequently recast as the extant Manusmṛti - only two views ascribed to Mānavas in Kauțilīya not found in extant Manusmṛti - in the *dharmasthīya* section the only other authors or schools cited are Bārhaspatyas and Auśanasas - none of the dharmasūtras of Gautama and others are anywhere quoted by name - views cited on the question as to whom a child belongs (to the begetter or to him on whose wife it is begotten) can be traced to Baudhyāna, Gautama and Vasiṣṭha - views of Ācaryas cited in the Kauțilīya - Kauțilīya later than Gautama and Āpastamba but earlier than extant Manusmṛti - date of Kauțilīya - it is certainly not later than 2nd century A. D. and not earlier than 325 B. C. - schools named by Kauțilya and also individual authors - views of Ācaryas are quoted over fifty times and Kauțilya differs in each case - meaning of ‘ācaryas’ - literature known to Kauțilya - Sanskrit official language and the work mentions *guṇas* of composition - Kauțilīya agrees with Kāmasūtra in several respects - Dr. Jolly and Prof. Keith opine that both works composed about same time - points of difference between the two works - countries and peoples mentioned by Kauțilya - silks from Cīna and blankets from Nepal - home of Kauțilya, southern acc. to Dr. Jolly who concludes so, on two quite worthless grounds - Buddhist and Jain traditions associate Cāṇakya with Gāndhāra - was resident of the extreme North-west of India - three principal groups of writers on the question of the
 
age of Kauṭilya – corporations of Licchavis, Vr̥jikas and others mentioned – meaning of ‘ rājasabdopajivinah ’ (in XI. 1) - best breeds of horses - Mlecchas sold or pledged children - references to Buddhists and Ājīvakas - weights to be made from stones of Magadha and Mekala - most of the stories cited as illustrations by Kauṭilya occur in the Mahābhārata, but some divergence exists in the case of Janamejaya, Māṇḍavya - Kauṭilya's knowledge of drugs and of rasa (mercury) - references to shrines of Śiva, Skanda &c.- traditional date of 300 B. C. more likely to be correct than 3rd centnry A. D. approved by of by Dr. Jolly and Winternitz - two commentaries on Kauṭilya, Nayacandrikā of Mādhavayajvan and Pratipadapañcikā of Bhaṭṭasvāmin - sūtras attributed to Cāṇakya - several nīti collections in verse ascribed to Cāṇakya are later than Kauṭilya.

=== UNCOVERED SANSKRIT TERMS ===
These terms have diacritics but no pronunciation guide entry:
  Auśanasas
  Baudhyāna
  Bhaṭṭasvāmin
  Bārhaspatyas
  Bṛhatkathā
  Cākṣuṣīya
  Cāņakya
  Cāṇakya
  Dandanīti
  Guņādhya
  Gāndhāra
  Kathāsaritsāgara
  Kauțalī
  Kauțilīya
  Kāmāndakīyanītisāra
  Kāvyādarśa
  Mudrārākṣasa
  Mādhavayajvan
  Māṇḍavya
  Nayacandrikā
  Nītiśāstra
  Pañca
  Pratipadapañcikā
  Prācetasa
  Purāņa
  Purāņas
  Rājanīti
  Rājanītiśāstra
  Rājaśāstra
  Rāmāyaņa
  Svāyambhuva
  Tantrākhyāyikā
  Varāhamihira
  apadeśa
  arthaśāstra
  dharmasthīya
  guṇas
  rājasabdopajivinah
  vyavahārapadas
  Ācaryas
  Ājīvakas
  ācaryas
  Śāstrī